Create Blog Post “how-to-make-phone-calls-with-swiftui-1” (#2458)
Nexmo/deved-platform: content/blog/en/how-to-make-phone-calls-with-swiftui-1.md

---
title: How to Make Phone Calls With SwiftUI

> description: "-"

Reviewer: Suggestion from the [SEO document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UGZupWzmVdIvnMzhWE3ZVQNKfMh3aKtQixtsV442PF4/edit#)
```suggestion
description: "Learn how to make phone calls using SwiftUI with Vonage. Follow our step-by-step tutorials and enhance your app's communication capabilities."
```

author: abdul-ajetunmobi
published: true
published_at: 2023-05-19T15:48:05.662Z
updated_at: 2023-05-19T15:48:05.843Z
category: tutorial
tags:
  - swift
  - voice-api
  - client-sdk
comments: true
spotlight: false
redirect: ""
canonical: ""
outdated: false
replacement_url: ""
---

> In this tutorial, you will create a SwiftUI application that can make calls to a specified phone number using the Vonage Client SDK for iOS.

Reviewer: Suggestion from the [SEO document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UGZupWzmVdIvnMzhWE3ZVQNKfMh3aKtQixtsV442PF4/edit#):
Expand on this section by a sentence or two to add additional details around common applications, ease of use, etc. See the following competitor article for reference:
https://swifttom.com/2021/01/03/how-to-make-a-phone-call-using-swiftui/

## Prerequisites

> + A Vonage API account. If you don’t have one already, you can [sign up today](https://dashboard.nexmo.com/sign-up).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ A Vonage API account. If you don't have one already, you can [sign up today](https://dashboard.nexmo.com/sign-up).
```

> + A Vonage API account. If you don’t have one already, you can [sign up today](https://dashboard.nexmo.com/sign-up).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ A Vonage API account. If you don't have one already, you can [sign up today](https://dashboard.nexmo.com/sign-up).
```

+ Xcode 12 and Swift 5 or greater.

+ [Cocoapods](https://cocoapods.org) to install the Vonage Client SDK for iOS.

+ The Vonage CLI. If you do not have it already, it can be installed with `npm install -g @vonage/cli`.

## Overview 

> This project has 3 parts, the Vonage application, the webhook server, and the iOS application. The Vonage application is how you can use the Vonage products, in this case, the [Voice API](https://developer.vonage.com/en/voice/voice-api/overview). The Vonage application you will make requires 2 URLs, an `answer_url` and an `event_url`. The `answer_url` needs to return a Call Control Object which will tell Vonage how to handle the call. The server part of the project will return a Call Control Object based on the number that is specified in the iOS application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project has 3 parts, the Vonage application, the webhook server, and the iOS application. The Vonage application is how you can use the Vonage products, in this case, the [Voice API](https://developer.vonage.com/en/voice/voice-api/overview). The Vonage application you will make requires 2 URLs, an `answer_url` and an `event_url`. The `answer_url` needs to return a Call Control Object, which will tell Vonage how to handle the call. The server part of the project will return a Call Control Object based on the number that is specified in the iOS application.
```

> ## Creating the server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating the Server
```

> As mentioned earlier, you need to create a webhook server that exposes two URLs with one returning a [Call Control Object](https://developer.vonage.com/en/voice/voice-api/ncco-reference). It will contain a connect action that will forward the call to the [PSTN phone number](https://developer.vonage.com/en/concepts/guides/glossary#virtual-number). You do this by extracting the destination number from the `to` query parameter and returning it in your response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned earlier, you need to create a webhook server that exposes two URLs, with one returning a [Call Control Object](https://developer.vonage.com/en/voice/voice-api/ncco-reference). It will contain a connect action that will forward the call to the [PSTN phone number](https://developer.vonage.com/en/concepts/guides/glossary#virtual-number). You do this by extracting the destination number from the `to` query parameter and returning it in your response.
```

Create a new project directory in a destination of your choice and change into it:

```
mkdir vonage-tutorial
cd vonage-tutorial
```

Inside the folder, initialize a new Node.js project by running this command:

```
npm init -y
npm install express localtunnel --save
```

> You will need a Vonage number, you can purchase a number using the Vonage CLI. The following command purchases an available number in the US. Specify an [alternate two-character country code](https://www.iban.com/country-codes) to purchase a number in another country.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need a Vonage number. You can purchase a number using the Vonage CLI. The following command purchases an available number in the US. Specify an [alternate two-character country code](https://www.iban.com/country-codes) to purchase a number in another country.
```

```
vonage numbers:search US
vonage numbers:buy 15555555555 US
```

Inside your project folder, create a file named `server.js` and add the code as shown below - please make sure to replace `NUMBER` with your Vonage number (in [E.164](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.164) format), as well as `SUBDOMAIN` with a unique value. The value used will become part of the URLs you will set as webhooks in the next step.

## Creating the Vonage application

In this step, you will create a Vonage [Application](https://developer.vonage.com/en/conversation/concepts/application) capable of in-app voice communication use cases.

> ### Create an application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create an Application
```

> Create a Vonage application by copying and pasting the command below into the terminal. Make sure to change the values of `--voice_answer_url` and `--voice_event_url` arguments, by replacing `SUBDOMAIN` with the actual value used in the previous step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Vonage application by copying and pasting the command below into the terminal. Make sure to change the values of `--voice_answer_url` and `--voice_event_url` arguments by replacing `SUBDOMAIN` with the actual value used in the previous step:
```

```
vonage apps:create "SwiftUICall" --voice_answer_url=https://SUBDOMAIN.loca.lt/voice/answer --voice_event_url=https://SUBDOMAIN.loca.lt/voice/event
```

A file named `vonage_app.json` is created in your project directory and contains the newly created Vonage Application ID and the private key. A private key file named `SwiftUICall.key` is also created. Now that your application is created, link your Vonage number to your application:

```
vonage apps:link APPLICATION_ID --number=YOUR_VONAGE_NUMBER
```

### Create a user

The Vonage Conversation API has the concept of [users](https://developer.vonage.com/conversation/concepts/user). A user represents a unique user of your application and therefore has a unique ID. This is how your iOS application will authenticate with and be identified by the Vonage servers. You can use the CLI to create a user: 

```sh
vonage apps:users:create "Alice"
```

This will add a user, with the username Alice, to your application and output their unique ID.

### Create a JWT

> The Vonage Client SDKs use JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) for authentication. JWTs are a method for representing claims securely between two parties. You can read more about JWTs on [JWT.io](https://jwt.io) or the claims that the [Conversation API supports](https://developer.vonage.com/conversation/guides/jwt-acl). We will be using the private key, application ID and username from the earlier sections to create the JWT needed for your iOS application. Again, this is done via the CLI. Replace the `APPLICATION_ID` variable with id of your application and `PRIVATE_KEY` with the name of your private key file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Vonage Client SDKs use JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) for authentication. JWTs are a method for representing claims securely between two parties. You can read more about JWTs on [JWT.io](https://jwt.io) or the claims that the [Conversation API supports](https://developer.vonage.com/conversation/guides/jwt-acl). We will be using the private key, application ID, and username from the earlier sections to create the JWT needed for your iOS application. Again, this is done via the CLI. Replace the `APPLICATION_ID` variable with the id of your application and `PRIVATE_KEY` with the name of your private key file.
```

```
vonage jwt --app_id=APPLICATION_ID --subject=Alice --key_file=./PRIVATE_KEY --acl='{"paths":{"/*/users/**":{},"/*/conversations/**":{},"/*/sessions/**":{},"/*/devices/**":{},"/*/image/**":{},"/*/media/**":{},"/*/applications/**":{},"/*/push/**":{},"/*/knocking/**":{},"/*/legs/**":{}}}'
```

> This will output the JWT for the user Alice that has been signed using your private key. Keep a hold of this as you will need it later. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will output the JWT for the user Alice that has been signed using your private key. Keep a hold of this, as you will need it later. 
```

## Creating the iOS application

Now that the server and Vonage application are set up, it is time to build the iOS application. 

### Create an Xcode project

> To get started, open Xcode and create a new project by going to File > New > Project. Select an App template and give it a name. Select, SwiftUI for the interface, SwiftUI App for the life cycle, and Swift for the language. Finally, a location to save your project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, open Xcode and create a new project by going to File > New > Project. Select an App template and give it a name. Select, SwiftUI for the interface, SwiftUI App for the life cycle, and Swift for the language—finally, a location to save your project. 
```

![Xcode project creation](xcodeproject.png)

### Install the Vonage Client SDK

> Now that the project is created you can add the Vonage Client SDK as a dependency. Navigate to the location where you saved the project in your terminal and run the following commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the project is created, you can add the Vonage Client SDK as a dependency. Navigate to the location where you saved the project in your terminal and run the following commands.
```

1. Run the `pod init` command to create a new Podfile for your project.

1. Open the Podfile in Xcode using `open -a Xcode Podfile`.

1. Update the Podfile to have `VonageClientSDKVoice` as a dependency. 

> ```ruby

Reviewer 2: Yes :(

# Uncomment the next line to define a global platform for your project
# platform :ios, '9.0'

target 'SwiftUICall' do

>     # Comment the next line if you don't want to use dynamic frameworks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Comment the next line if you don't want to use dynamic frameworks
```

    use_frameworks!

    # Pods for SwiftUICall
    pod 'VonageClientSDKVoice'

end
```
4. Install the SDK using `pod install`.

1. Open the new *xcworkspace* file in Xcode using `open SwiftUICall.xcworkspace`.

> ### Microphone permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Microphone Permissions
```

> Since the application will be using the microphone to place calls you need to explicitly ask for permission to do so. The first step is to edit the `Info.plist` file. This is a file that contains all the metadata required for the application. Add a new entry to the file by hovering your mouse over the last entry in the list and click the little `+` button that appears. From the dropdown list, pick `Privacy - Microphone Usage Description` and add `Microphone access required to make and receive audio calls.` for its value. You will do the second step for requesting microphone permissions later on in the tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the application will use the microphone to place calls, you need to explicitly ask permission to do so. The first step is to edit the `Info.plist` file. This is a file that contains all the metadata required for the application. Add a new entry to the file by hovering your mouse over the last entry in the list and clicking the little `+` button that appears. Pick `Privacy - Microphone Usage Description` from the dropdown list and add `Microphone access required to make and receive audio calls.` for its value. You will do the second step for requesting microphone permissions later in the tutorial.
```

> ### Creating the model class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating the Model Class
```

> Before you start building the user interface (UI) for the app you will build a model class first. This class is used to separate the logic of the app from the view code. In this case, the model class will handle the delegate calls from the Client SDK and when the call button should show. At the top of the `ContentView.swift` file, import the Client SDK and AVFoundation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you start building the app's user interface (UI), you will build a model class first. This class is used to separate the logic of the app from the view code. In this case, the model class will handle the delegate calls from the Client SDK and when the call button should show. At the top of the `ContentView.swift` file, import the Client SDK and AVFoundation.
```

```swift
import SwiftUI
import AVFoundation
import VonageClientSDKVoice
```

> Then at the bottom of the file create a new class called `CallModel`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then at the bottom of the file, create a new class called `CallModel`:
```

```swift
final class CallModel: NSObject, ObservableObject, VGVoiceClientDelegate {

}
```

Within this class, define the properties and helper functions needed:

```swift
final class CallModel: NSObject, ObservableObject, VGVoiceClientDelegate {
    @Published var status: String = ""
    @Published var isCalling: Bool = false
    let client = VGVoiceClient()
    var number: String = ""
    
    private var callId: String?
    private let audioSession = AVAudioSession.sharedInstance()
    
    func updateStatus(_ text: String) {
        DispatchQueue.main.async {
            self.status = text
        }
    }
    
    func resetState() {
        DispatchQueue.main.async {
            self.callId = nil
            self.isCalling = false
            self.number = ""
        }
    }
}
```

> The `@Published` property wrapper is how the UI will know when to react to changes from the model class, this is all handled for you as the class conforms to the `ObservedObject` protocol. The `client` property is for the Vonage Voice Client which will allow you to make calls. `callId` is used to store the call object and `audioSession` is used to request the microphone permissions. Configure the Client SDK:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@Published` property wrapper is how the UI will know when to react to changes from the model class. This is all handled for you as the class conforms to the `ObservedObject` protocol. The `client` property is for the Vonage Voice Client, which will allow you to make calls. `callId` is used to store the call object, and `audioSession` is used to request the microphone permissions. Configure the Client SDK:
```

```swift
func initializeClient() {
    let config = VGClientConfig(region: .US)
    client.setConfig(config)
    client.delegate = self
}
```

To complete requesting microphone permissions for the app add the following function to the `CallModel` class:

```swift
func requestPermissionsIfNeeded() {
    if audioSession.recordPermission != .granted {
        audioSession.requestRecordPermission { (isGranted) in
            print("Microphone permissions \(isGranted)")
        }
    }
}
```

> This will first check if the permissions have already been granted, if not it will request them and print out the outcome to the console. Next, you need to log in as the Alice user with the Client SDK. To do so add the next function to the `CallModel` class, replacing `ALICE_JWT` with the JWT from earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will first check if the permissions have already been granted; if not it will request them and print out the outcome to the console. Next, you need to log in as the Alice user with the Client SDK. To do so, add the next function to the `CallModel` class, replacing `ALICE_JWT` with the JWT from earlier:
```

```swift
func loginIfNeeded() {
    guard status != "Connected" else { return }
    client.createSession("ALICE_JWT") { error, sessionId in
        if let error {
            self.updateStatus(error.localizedDescription)
        } else {
            self.updateStatus("Connected")
        }
    }
}
```

> This function checks if the client is already logged in, if it isn't it will use the JWT you generated earlier to log in and set the delegate for the client to this class. The `VGVoiceClientDelegate` is how the Client SDK communicates changes with the Vonage servers back to your application. Next, implement the required delegate functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function checks if the client is already logged in; if not, it will use the JWT you generated earlier to log in and set the delegate for the client to this class. The `VGVoiceClientDelegate` is how the Client SDK communicates changes with the Vonage servers back to your application. Next, implement the required delegate functions.
```

```swift
func voiceClient(_ client: VGVoiceClient, didReceiveHangupForCall callId: VGCallId, withQuality callQuality: VGRTCQuality, reason: VGHangupReason) {
    self.resetState()
}

func client(_ client: VGBaseClient, didReceiveSessionErrorWith reason: VGSessionErrorReason) {
    let reasonString: String!
    
    switch reason {
    case .tokenExpired:
        reasonString = "Expired Token"
    case .pingTimeout, .transportClosed:
        reasonString = "Network Error"
    default:
        reasonString = "Unknown"
    }
    
    status = reasonString
}

func voiceClient(_ client: VGVoiceClient, didReceiveInviteForCall callId: VGCallId, from caller: String, with type: VGVoiceChannelType) {}
func voiceClient(_ client: VGVoiceClient, didReceiveInviteCancelForCall callId: VGCallId, with reason: VGVoiceInviteCancelReason) {}
```

> When there is a session error the `status` property is updated and if the call ends, the model's state gets reset. The next two functions you need to add will allow your application to make and end calls. Add the following functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When there is a session error the `status` property is updated and if the call ends, the model's state gets reset. The following two functions you need to add will allow your application to make and end calls. Add the following functions.
```

```swift
func callNumber() {
    self.isCalling = true
    client.serverCall(["to": number]) { error, callId in
        if error == nil {
            self.callId = callId
        }
    }
}

func endCall() {
    client.hangup(callId!) { error in
        if error == nil {
            self.resetState()
        }
    }
}
```

> The `callNumber` function uses the Client SDK to make a call to the number from the `number` property. This uses the `answer_url` from earlier on in the tutorial. Vonage will then make an HTTP call to your `answer_url` with the number from the iOS application, which will return a Call Control Object with instructions for Vonage to connect your app to the number. If this all succeeds the Client SDK returns a call ID which is stored on the class. The `endCall` function hangs up the call, sets the `callId` property to nil and sets the published `isCalling` boolean back to false so the UI can update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `callNumber` function uses the Client SDK to make a call to the number from the `number` property. This uses the `answer_url` from earlier on in the tutorial. Vonage will then make an HTTP call to your `answer_url` with the number from the iOS application, which will return a Call Control Object with instructions for Vonage to connect your app to the number. If this all succeeds, the Client SDK returns a call ID which is stored on the class. The `endCall` function hangs up the call, sets the `callId` property to nil, and sets the published `isCalling` boolean back to false so the UI can update.
```

The final function that you need to add to the `CallModel` calls `initializeClient`, `requestPermissionsIfNeeded`, and `loginIfNeeded` functions.

```swift
func setup() {
    initializeClient()
    requestPermissionsIfNeeded()
    loginIfNeeded()
}
```

> ### Create the user interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create the User Interface
```

> The UI will consist of a `Text` object to display the status, a `TextField` object for the number entry and a pair of `Button` objects to start and end calls. Add a property for the `CallModel` class you created earlier to the `ContentView` struct and use it to display the status of the Client SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UI will consist of a `Text` object to display the status, a `TextField` object for the number entry, and a pair of `Button` objects to start and end calls. Add a property for the `CallModel` class you created earlier to the `ContentView` struct and use it to display the status of the Client SDK.
```

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    @ObservedObject var callModel = CallModel()
    
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            Text(callModel.status)
        }
        .animation(.default)
        .onAppear(perform: self.callModel.setup)
    }
}
```

> When the view appears, it will call the `setup` function on the model class, this will request the microphone permissions and log the client in. Doing so will update the `status` property on the model class and the change in its value will prompt the `ContentView` to update!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the view appears, it will call the `setup` function on the model class; this will request the microphone permissions and log the client in. Doing so will update the `status` property on the model class, and the change in its value will prompt the `ContentView` to update!
```

> Now that the client is logged in, you can now use the rest of the published properties on the model class to build the rest of the UI. Add the following block of code to the VStack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the client is logged in, you can use the rest of the published properties on the model class to build the rest of the UI. Add the following block of code to the VStack.
```

```swift
if self.callModel.status == "Connected" {
    TextField("Enter a phone number", text: $callModel.number)
        .textFieldStyle(RoundedBorderTextFieldStyle())
        .multilineTextAlignment(.center)
        .keyboardType(.numberPad)
        .disabled(self.callModel.isCalling)
        .padding(20)
    
    if !self.callModel.isCalling {
        Button(action: { self.callModel.callNumber() }) {
            HStack(spacing: 10) {
                Image(systemName: "phone")
                Text("Call")
            }
        }
    }
    
    if self.callModel.isCalling {
        Button(action: { self.callModel.endCall() }) {
            HStack(spacing: 10) {
                Image(systemName: "phone")
                Text("End Call")
            }
            .foregroundColor(Color.red)
        }
    }
}
```

> If the client is connected, the `TextField` will animate onto the view. The value of the `TextField` is bound to the `number` property of the model class, this is done by using the `$` sign. Once a valid length of number has been entered the conditions for showing the call button will be met, and once a call has started the conditions will no longer be met but the conditions for the end call button will be. So only one button shows at a time, and all the updating of the UI will be handled for you! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TextField` will animate onto the view if the client is connected. The value of the `TextField` is bound to the `number` property of the model class. This is done by using the `$` sign. Once a valid length of number has been entered, the conditions for showing the call button will be met, and once a call has started, the conditions will no longer be met, but the conditions for the end call button will be. So only one button shows at a time, and all the updating of the UI will be handled for you! 
```

> ### Run your application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run Your Application
```

> If you run the project (CMD + R), you will first be prompted to allow microphone permissions you will be able to enter a number and call it! The format of numbers should be in the [E.164](https://developer.vonage.com/concepts/guides/glossary#e-164-format) format. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run the project (`CMD + R`), you will first be prompted to allow microphone permissions. You will be able to enter a number and call it! The format of numbers should be in the [E.164](https://developer.vonage.com/concepts/guides/glossary#e-164-format) format. 
```

![Making a call](call.gif)

> ### What is next?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What Is Next?
```

> You can find the completed project on [GitHub](https://github.com/Vonage-Community/blog-clientsdk-ios_swift-swiftui_app_to_phone). You can do a lot more with the Client SDK, learn more on [developer.vonage.com](https://developer.vonage.com/vonage-client-sdk/overview).

Reviewer: Please also add a note inviting folks to our Twitter and Slack community.

https://vonage.slack.com/archives/C0200MQ4BPE/p1655900662081889

> You can find the completed project on [GitHub](https://github.com/Vonage-Community/blog-clientsdk-ios_swift-swiftui_app_to_phone). You can do a lot more with the Client SDK, learn more on [developer.vonage.com](https://developer.vonage.com/vonage-client-sdk/overview).

Reviewer: The related content section was requested in the SEO document.
```suggestion
You can find the completed project on [GitHub](https://github.com/Vonage-Community/blog-clientsdk-ios_swift-swiftui_app_to_phone). You can do a lot more with the Client SDK. Learn more on [developer.vonage.com](https://developer.vonage.com/vonage-client-sdk/overview).

## Related Content
[How to Make a Phone Call with SwiftUI](https://developer.vonage.com/en/blog/building-a-drop-in-audio-app-with-swiftui-vapor-and-vonage-part-1) Part 1

[How to Make a Phone Call with SwiftUI] (https://developer.vonage.com/en/blog/building-a-drop-in-audio-app-with-swiftui-vapor-and-vonage-part-2) Part 2

```

Reviewer 2: Those posts are using the old SDK so probably should add them
